Jeg kan godt anbefale
det.
Could we have
Matthew's-
No, he's not. He's supposed to be on the line.
He's not there?
He's-
Right. David Schwartz?
Yes.
Hello.
My name's-
Um, is Rachel coming back here?
I'm a Jew, so.
Yeah.
And Schwartz.
I'm Rachel, who's for...
Right. We've got five minutes with you, Mr. Schwartz.
Um-
Okay.
It'd be good to hear from you. We have seen your, submission, as you're
probably aware. Yep.
Tena koutou katoa, Shalom.
I'm a Jew, and I have special concerns for the safety of the
New Zealand Jewish community, which is very similar to the concerns
of the Muslim community, who I think you've heard from, and I
support their submission to this bill from
FIANZ, the Federation of Islamic Associations.
The New Zealand Jewish community has not suffered the same
tragedy as the massacre of Muslim worshipers in
Christchurch on 15th of March 2019,
but the Jewish community is experiencing the same
increase in anti-Jewish incidents as is
happening worldwide.
New Zealand police figures show the highest ever number of such
incidents over the last two years,
and we have reason to fear the possibility of an,
an event here similar to the December two thousand
and twenty-five massacre in, in Bondi, in Sydney.
So relating this to the Arms Bill,
I want to draw your attention to changes in wording which appear to
increase the risks for the Jewish community, not reduce
them.
In Clause 3, Section B of the bill,
right at the beginning, the wording is, "Impose controls
to prevent the possession and use of arms for criminal
activity."
This is actually looser than the wording of the present act.
The present Clause 1A of the act
particularly balances the individual
privilege of possession and use of arms against the
individual responsibility of acting in the interests
of personal and public safety, and this is no longer
expressed so precisely in the bill.
For instance, hate speech is not a crime in New Zealand,
but our history shows that hate speech against Jews
morphs into hate action against Jews.
Linking arms possession and use to criminality,
and more specifically to gangs, bypasses the
emphasis on responsibility for public safety that
exists in the present act.
It's that emphasis that provide better protection for the Jewish
community and for other minority ethnic and
religious communities.
I support the submission from Gun Control New Zealand that calls for
a rewording of Clause 3 in the bill.Along
the lines of saying, quote, "Impose controls on the
possession and use of arms for personal and public
safety," close quote.
There are other detailed recommendations in the Gun Control New Zealand submission
that have a bearing on the protection of the Jewish community
within the umbrella of public safety that I
support.
Nami hinui shalom.
Thank you very much. Um,
can I just... While people are digesting that, you
say specific- I'm opposed to
allowing vetting period for pest controls from two and a half to five
years.
Why, why is that specifically about pest controllers?
Obviously, pest-
I'm sorry, I, I didn't hear you.
Oh, sorry. In your submission, you say, "I'm opposed to,
to the following changes," and you list three of them,
but you're saying extending the vetting periods for pest controllers
from two and a half to five years. Why do you specifically target the pest
controllers? Do you think they're a high risk?
No.
It will be a very small group.
I, I... Um, so I think it's just a question of, of ex-
Sorry, I'm re-
That's all right. That's all right.
Should've done that before. Uh, no, I don't think pest controllers
individually are, are a greater risk.
I just think that-
That's not-
As in other parts of the changes in the bill, it, it,
it, it shows an, an extension of what exists
now.
Yeah. Okay.
Not, not,
n- certainly not directly personally against pest controllers.
And your, o- the other last submission, change, you're s- you're
say- suggesting mandatory reporting, requiring license
holders to report other license holders whom they believe pose a
risk to themselves or others. You're saying that's a mandatory
widespread, requirement that should be imposed on
all rifle owners or fire, license holders?
I, I used to work in the, in the educational field.
Mm.
And I remember the controversy about teachers making
mandatory reports when they saw children who had
been coming to class with bruises or some sort-
Yeah
... as, as an indication of, of physical abuse in the home.
And I think that that aspect of
being aware that another person, your friend, may be
having some changes in his attitudes that will
lead to something dangerous is something that I think is,
is well worth incorporating.
Okay. All right.
I, I think we have the same in, within the bill or within the...
I'm not sure within the Present Act on requiring
doctors to report,
wounds from,
from the use of arms.
Right.
Uh, it's an indication. It's not, it's not a direct
accusation, but it's just to, to indicate a, a feeling that something might be
going wrong. People change, and if some- sometimes
they start showing, degrees of, of
difference of opinion, that might become violent.
And, and if this is... If there is some awareness of that,
then the, the, the, the Jewish community will be
safer as a result.
All right. Hey, well, thank you for your submission.
Right. Um, we're going to, Mr. Selwyn
McCallum.
Yes.
Um, in person, hopefully.
Yeah.
You're right there.
Right.
Nice to see you, Mr. McCallum.
Thank you.
You've got five minutes. We've seen your submission.
Yep.
Look, my primary reason for being here today is
regarding airguns. Um, they're my area of expertise and my area of
interest. Currently, the act, the proposed
act defines the airgun as anything by which, by the use of gas or
compressed air discharges any bull- bullet, missile, or
other projectile.
That basically covers everything from a pop gun to a Nerf gun to a
spud gun.
Anything, literally, you squeeze a bulb and it fires a... If I...
A straw, a plastic straw with a spitball.
The use of the compressed air in my lungs becomes a weapon under this
act.
It's ridiculous. It says that, other than
exempted f- other than exempted airguns can be made by
regulation.
Why are we adding another layer of regulation, another layer
of, bureaucracy to a system that can be easily solved
simply by going the UK model? We say anything under 2
joules, right? And 2 joules is the limit by which a
projectile can do any meaningful harm.
That's a toy. We know it's a toy.
Right? That covers all of Nerf guns, it covers gel blasters, it covers all of the
current toy guns that you can find at any two-dollar
shop in New Zealand.
Anything between 2 joules and 18 joules is an air rifle.
Anything ordinarily capable of over 18 joules
is a firearm and is regulated as a firearm.
Mm.
Now, that covers... And I choose 18 joules very deliberately because
that's the upper end of what a paintball gun is capable of,
and it's certainly above the limit that all commercial paintball gun fields
set for their, for operation.
That 18-joule limit catches everything from the current
airgun I can buy at Gun City that uses a CO2 cylinder to
fire a full-sized arrow faster than my compound hunting bow can fire
one, and yet that's a no license required airgun under the current
regulations and under what you're proposing.
If you set an upper limit of 18 joules or 16 joules, whatever
the government decides is the appropriate point, and I would suggest 18 very
strongly,
at that point, it becomes a licensable
firearmEvery arms
dealer, every paintball field, every airsoft field,
every firearms range, and I would say a good sixty percent of firearms owners
own a chronograph. No bigger than a mobile phone and a
trivial cost.
If the police take a weapon into, into custody,
they run a five-shot string over it with a, with a commercially available
chronograph, that gets recorded as evidence at the time of seizure,
and then there's no questions about what it was when the police seized
it. It takes away the need for restrictive and
confusing orders in council. It takes away the need for
regulations to... And I don't think the current government or any
government could actually list all of the various gun toys
that are out there that are still sold in every two dollar shop, every Kmart,
adequately to prevent them being defined as an air rifle under the current act.
But with simple changes, I believe you could.
Right. Now, I've got a, a question from my good colleague here, Mr.
O'Connor.
Yeah, thanks. Right. Can you see an issue with air--
those air pistols and the air rifles, in that you talked about
being able to go and test them later on at the station, but how do
you know
what the strength or what the, that pistol
at the time? You- usually gonna be seizing them on the street at a
search situation. We're gonna be seizing them at a search warrant.
Um, so if you don't... You wouldn't be able to seize them to go and
test them, would you? If you-
Yes, you would.
If they're being seized-
On what, on what grounds could you seize them?
The, a belief that they were being used in criminal activity.
If you've got a warrant
or you've pulled over someone at a stop, and they've got an air rifle in the car,
right? The current act already says they're deemed to be in possession of it.
If an officer has reasonable belief that that could be a firearm or, or a
more powerful weapon, they've got every right to seize it and, and check
it. If they're wrong,
it gets returned. If they believe it was used in criminal activity,
then regardless of whether it's a firearm, look, it looks like
a firearm, under the legislation, it's treated as a firearm for the
purposes of prosecution.
But remember, the possession in itself is the criminal offense
and, when it comes to a possession of an illegal firearm-
And that, that is where the police, that's where the police have to use their
judgment, or the legislation has to have room
for, much like we do with cars, illegally modified
cars. We can seize them, we can get them tested.
If we're wrong, we return them.
Right? We're talking about things that pose danger to human life.
Being able to turn around and go, "I'm sorry, after, after examination, this
was not,"
and returning it to the person if they're, if they're appro- if it's appropriate-
Yeah
... is better than allowing those weapons
into, the wrong hands.
Police make mistakes. Everyone makes mistakes.
It's better to have a law that sets a clear definable limit and if
the police have got reason for concern, they seize it, they test it.
If it's a firearm, it becomes a possession offense.
If it's not a firearm, they've already raided the place, they've probably got more
than enough offenses on the book already.
Yeah. Okay.
Which actually, if I may, just one quick other one.
Your definition of restricted firearm
or restricted airgun,
if I may be blunt, is patently ludicrous.
Every airgun to a layman looks like a firearm.
There is no such thing as an airgun that if presented in a dark alley
or presented at ten meters does not sufficiently resemble a
firearm to concern a police officer.
Yeah.
I, I carried a gun for a living for twenty years in Australia.
Believe me, if it looks like a gun, it's a gun until you, until you're made, made
it safe.
Yeah.
So having a separate rule for restricted airgun, and then
saying, "Resembles a firearm,"
is an unnecessary piece of legislation because every airgun-
Okay. All right. Hey, thank you. We, we had the paintball people
at weekend, week before. They were talking about up to seventeen joules,
so you're in line with that. Thank you for your submission.
No, thank you.
Right. Now, Simon, Nelson. Mr.
Simon Nelson,
you have been waiting patiently for a while.
That's all right.
You know the drill.
Yeah. Been here before, unfortunately.
Well, not unfortunately. You don't have to say that.
Well, let's hope we get a result this time.
All right. I... My name's Simon Nelson. Um, thank you for the opportunity today.
Um, I've been involved with firearms for over forty years, both
professionally and personally. Um, I take part in many disciplines, including
hunting, target shooting, collecting, and I am the current president of
the Hawke's Bay branch of the Antique Arms Association.
Um, I would like to say that on a whole, I support the rewrite of the act, but
there is a few things, points I'd like to raise, obviously.
Um, I do fully support the removal of the police from administering
the act, from having any control of the regulator.
Um, it's time for this to change and we put in place a system that all New
Zealanders, licensed and non-licensed, can believe in.
Um, one of the things I'd like to te- it's probably a contentious issue, is around
prohibited firearms. Um, at the moment, I believe it's,
it could be tidied up. You have
many categories of P endorsement which all end up in the same place.
If we wrap them all up in one,
'cause the vetting, the storage, the only thing that
changes at the end is the use.
So you, people still have access to, you know, they have access to them, which
I believe is probably your primary concern as far as safety goes.
And, and this is not talking about the proliferation of them or
more of them being out in the community, but the fact is that they are out there
and held within-- Certain people do have the right to hold these items,
and it's about getting... I would like to see something akin to the old
ECAPSo it's not a watering down of the vetting process, it's not a watering
down of the security process. It's none of that.
It merely means that if we are applying to r- hold these
items, that you go through that process, and at the end of it you're deemed a fit
and proper person to both have possession of them, and
I can see no real harm in then if you have possession of them, to have use of them.
So, so how does that licensing work at the moment?
When you apply for a P category endorsement, you apply under several
categories, um-
What are the categories?
Um, ooh, heirloom,
collector,
museum-
Yes
... theater, and yep, pest control,
uh... Hang on, what's the other one?
It's all the pen endorsements, magazines.
Yeah. Oh, yeah, and a separate... Yeah, 'cause I count those as separate, and
there's a pen endorsement for them.
So they're all, they're all different categories.
They're all different categories, and you apply-
And you're saying they should all be put in under a P category.
Yes, but you state-
Which would mean you've gotta be probably, probably more inten- intensely vetted.
But the vetting is the same for all of them now.
Yeah. Okay.
You know? Because you're gonna have access to these things.
Right.
And that's, that's... Which is fair enough, okay?
Because for whatever reason you want to hold this item,
the fact is you will end up having access to it if granted a, an endorsement.
So why then do at the end we only say that only one particular
group can use it when the risk factor is
the access to them, not the use?
If you're following my-
Mm-hmm. Okay
... my theory.
Yeah, we do.
So in that way, 'cause if you look at what...
You know, you can have a P1, a P2, and P3, and a P... You know?
But they don't ultimately change anything.
Your reason for having it, and you can still put that down in your application,
but you in... The end result would be you'd all get to the same
place if granted that.
Um,
does that answer that one?
Yeah, that's good.
Oh, yeah. Um, the... Secondly, I'd like to bring up about,
in the act I'd like to see an amnesty for-
Yeah
... unregistered, and I brought that up 'cause that's a big one.
Mm-hmm.
I mean, I'm going through that at the moment, and it's a
pain. If, if we are serious about registering firearms,
then we need to put in place a process that enables
people-
Mm-hmm
... to willingly come forward. Um, I've taken
possession... I, I know this is going on.
I've taken possession of two handguns that have been unregistered for...
One of them for over 100 years. Comes from the family, brought it back.
It's been in the family's possession from the First World War, never been
registered.
The drama I've got with trying to get that registered and
the attitude of the FSA people, and
process at the moment, 'cause I have to find both a dealer
and also that dealer has to have a personal endorsement on their license
under which to hold that item, and then they then have to go to the
FSA and the police and apply to get it registered.
Right.
Okay. And I think it'd be a lot simpler if we said that if you hold an endorsement
for the particular item, whether it's a rifle or a handgun or whatever,
and you can bring it forward, there'd be no...
Granted, I accept that if it turns out that it's been used for nefarious or illegal
means, that you would
have to fess up where it came from and-
Yeah
... I'm hopeful you will. I've said that to these people.
If this turns out that it's been stolen or you've told me a story, I've
believed it, I've taken it to the FSA.
Okay.
But if it doesn't, I'm coming straight back to you.
Yeah.
You know?
All right. I think we've heard that one. Yeah.
Yeah.
Cool.
Um, and if you can, I know, I know it's not politically acceptable at the
moment. I, I don't believe in the register. I've been involved with it now.
Okay.
I think-
Okay, cool.
Yeah. Oh, yeah, I just think though that when you do it, can...
Is there any way that this committee can get the register changed to be more
user-friendly?
Oh, we've been asking those questions, so.
Yeah. 'Cause if you are gonna keep it, it needs to be better.
All right. Cool.
In order to encourage people.
I'm just conscious about time.
Oh, sorry.
But thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much for your time.
All right.
Cheers.
Excellent. Um, now we've got Mr. Conrad Peterson.
Good.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to my submission.
Is it all right if I stand?
Of course.
Thank you.
My concern is pure and simple.
The controls, the current controls
for
cartridges, pellets for air guns, any kind of
what I call ammunition, are way, way
too loose in my view. What we need to
see, in my opinion, and I'm basically, I'm just
elaborating on what I've said in my submission,
I personally think that we need the importation, the New Zealand
manufacture,
or remanufacture of all types
of ammunition for firearms or
high-powered air guns
to be
far more controlled, and this includes the storage,
any remanufacture, any sale.
All right? My focus is on
the ammunition, what I've... that very broad term.
You know, I don't care how many 3D guns you
print. You cannot print 3D ammunition
other than those slivers to put an ear off or
something. The focus, in my view, needs to
be not on the firearms themselves or their high-powered air
guns. That's not the way to get better
control.
So the other thing I would like to say, of course,
is that in my view,
this needs to go into regulation, not into
legislation.
There needs to be some real effort put into,
getting it right.Now my last few
years with the New Zealand Customs Service,
I worked very closely with Parliamentary Counsel Office
on legislation and regulations.
So I don't have any problem putting my money where my mouth
is. And what I mean by that is the
Parliamentary Counsel Office was to form a working group
to go into doing, putting some proper
regulation in place. I would happily put my hand up
and work with that on a free of charge basis.
Right.
We have to be very, very careful here
that we don't get traditional people,
like the black powder people, the bang and
clouds of smoke,
they should not be disadvantaged.
They should not be disadvantaged.
So there's quite a lot of care and effort goes into this.
I don't think for a moment that the majority of the firearms
people will like me at
all for what I'm proposing, 'cause in fact it's going to
make life a lot more difficult for them.
Right. Can I ask you a question?
Please, by all means.
Uh, Mr. Carl Bates.
Um, thanks very much Chair, and thanks for your submission.
Um,
by doing what you propose and as you say, making it more
difficult, more costly, for legitimate firearm-
Costly? You used the word costly
... well,
by adding regulation you're gonna add cost to the process.
Ah.
You're not gonna do what you were-
Cost-
... you're proposing without increasing costs
... excuse me, costly to who?
Well, I'm asking the questions, and my question to you is,
do you believe that doing this
would actually stop, the person who's trying
to clearly do something, that's against
the law from actually, doing that?
You're saying will it stamp out crime effectively?
My answer to that is of course no. We have I don't know how many
thousands of police,
as I seem to recall, and Mr. Otara will know.
Well, there are some distinguished gentlemen, so...
It's not, that's not gonna happen.
So it's-
Of course it's not
... so, so what effectively would it solve
if we, if we did what you propose?
It will effectively solve the immediate
problem of people being able to manufacture...
If I have a firearms license, I'm allowed to
manufacture ammunition at home.
No.
And you think that, that, that people who are, using
that ammunition for,
challenging purposes
would abide by
this change?
Define challenging.
Well, some of the
challenging circumstances we've had, deadly circumstances we've had
in New Zealand in the last couple of decades,
are those individuals gonna-
I would answer that-
... just not use ammunition or are they gonna find another way?
I would answer that question by saying, there will always
be challenges to rules and regulations.
What I'm endeavoring to do with my submission, and what I'm
r- requesting that this committee
consider, is just tightening the noose a little-
Right
... on round ammunition.
All right. Hey, thank you, Mr. Peterson.
Um,
as you say, it's a slightly different perspective,
but an interesting perspective.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you. Right, now we've got Mr.
John Knight who has been waiting patiently
from about 10 o'clock this morning.
Right.
Five minutes with you, Mr. Knight.
Tena koutou.
Um,
in my view, three words need adding to the
purpose of this act,
the words being under lawful circumstances
or, or equivalent.
Um, unless this is done, police are
unable to use the Arms Act, the current one,
to, prosecute people who
misuse firearms in rural New Zealand for the common
practice of poaching.
Now, I'm one of very few landowners, I've been a landowner
for 45 years, I've been a firearm user for 60 years,
I'm one of very few landowners who has managed to
get police, in a position where they can successfully
prosecute a poacher. That doesn't happen very often.
Um,
I've spent, I spent more than three decades trying to stop
poaching on our 230 hectare forest,
and I've achieved this finally by installing
28 trail cameras and numerous posters
provided by police. And I want to show you an enlarged
version of the police poster.
Now, the interesting thing about this poster is the
Arms Act is not mentioned.
It,
it's not mentioned. And the reason is that police
cannot use Section 45 of the Arms Act
because of a curious, in my view,
ruling,
on an appeal by Justice Wild, who
stated, "Hunting wild deer is a lawful,
proper, and sufficient purpose
for having a rifle."Full stop.
Irrespective of whether that person was
trespassing or in breach of the Wild Animal Control Act,
the circumstances didn't matter.
He was just taking a narrow reading of the purpose of this bill
and saying, "That, you know, means that
hunting wild deer is sufficient."
Um, the case, Daly versus Police,
involved Mr. Daly and a, and a,
co-conspirator were hunting on Ngamatea Station,
for a week, poaching.
Um, and, this appeal was allowed.
So since then, the police have
declined to use Section 45 of the Arms Act,
in cases involving poaching.
Now, the stated purpose of the current bill
is very similar to the stated purpose of the existing act.
So the decision of Justice Wild is gonna
carry over. It is going to
neutralize the effectiveness of the new
act unless something is done to add to the
purpose.
Cool. Right.
Yep.
Professor, we got a question already. Uh, do you wanna...
Have you got more you wanna say or no?
Uh, well, I was gonna talk about Section 253 because-
Oh, let's
... it's very similar to-
Yeah
... Section 45-
... of the existing act.
Um, but it's gonna f- fall by the wayside for the same reason.
Uh, but the other thing about Section 253 is it
specifically mentions
a public place.
Um-
Yeah.
Yeah. Now,
what about private pla- what about private land?
So it doesn't deal with poaching.
That's right. Um, but since writing my submission,
I've become aware of Section 256, which
could cover poaching, except,
commit an offense punishable by imprisonment for a term of three
years. The Wild Animal Control Act is only two
years. So unless that three years change to two,
this would not cover poaching.
Okay.
Questions?
Um, the, my-
You go for it.
Um,
who owns the wild deer on your land?
The Crown.
So really it shouldn't be about deer, it
should be about trespass, shouldn't it?
That's right.
So the fact that they're poaching, so wouldn't it be
a mistake to try and add poaching-
Well-
... to the Arms Act?
Um, you're trying... Whereas this is a completely different purposes.
No, but it's misuse of firearms, that's the issue.
Well-
The danger, the danger to me as a landowner, and to people who
I allow on my land, the, the, the
danger is
the misuse of firearms on our land.
It, it's nothing to do with deer really, it's, you know, if you want to
take that narrow view-
Well, but my-
It, it's the fact that armed people are coming on our land.
Po- poaching's a little bit to do with the deer, isn't it?
Oh, yeah.
So I'll just, I won't
Well, that's the intention. That's why they-
You can see that there are s- a few issues there
... Yeah, but that's why they're there, but that's not...
The issue is man with gun in the bushes,
possibly thinking you're a deer. You know, I, I find this
extremely intimidating.
Yeah. Well, I share your comments because I used to have poachers on my farm.
And once I caught, caught one with the two of us, and he said,
"If you do anything, I'm gonna come and shoot all your dogs."
Yeah.
Rather than, um...
And when you're standing in the middle of the bush-
Yeah
... wondering what's around the corner-
... I know you'd fear it.
Thank you.
All right. Cool. Thank you, Professor.
Um,
very helpful. Uh, no one else has raised poaching.
That's what we like, new stuff.
Mm-hmm.
Right. Thank you very much. Now we're gonna go on to David, Ala-
Alard,
who is by Zoom.
He's not.
Mr. Quentin Abraham,
right here waiting.
Right.
God, we've got a run of passion of people fronting up. It's great.
Um-
I've heard how good the chairman was. I...
Tena koutou te komiti o takitini. Uh, I'm Quentin
Abraham. I'm a psychologist. Um, I work with people with mental
health difficulties. It's not uncommon for me to have people have
suicidal thoughts or are suicidal.
Uh, and when guns are implicated, that's usually
fatal. So, I'm not in favor of this
bill,
m- mainly because I would like to see the regulations tightened.
I'd like the, the time period, to be, sort of
shorter. I'd like to see the police directly involved with that.
I'd like the legislation to be carefully drafted and well considered.
Um, the, it's estimated, like, over the course of a
lifetime, one in two of us will have a mental health difficulty.
Uh, a proportion of us, will be suicidal.
Um, y- just-
What sort of proportion?
So, in terms of the,
the, the numbers per, per year, we're talking about,
in terms of death, we're talking about
600 a year roughly. So we're talking relatively small numbers, but the
impact on those communities-
Well-
... often deprived, often, rural areas,
often where there are access to guns.
And,
we've got a lot of guns in this country, 1.7 million that we know that are
registered. Uh, we've got 6.5 times more
than Australia, 2.5 times more than the
UK. Um, so I'm interested in there being a few of those
circulated. Um, we notice when regulation was
reduced-Uh, we had sort of, a, a
reduction in the numbers of, of deaths by guns.
Um,
I kind of... I think there was mention before about the relation- the,
the similar regulation with cars.
I have a partner, she's a doctor. She has to tell elderly
people, "You're no longer able to drive a car."
Um, she has to weigh up the risk for the individual rights of that person
versus killing somebody on the road, and I, my own view
is that's a very complex decision.
To make those kind of predictions, is that person at risk or not-
Yeah
... is a difficult choice. I'd like to see police officers or very
well-trained people doing that, not somebody loosely trained
who, who's not able to make that decision or have the manner to
actually-
Who d- who does... Who are you referring to when you say-
So I'm referring to at the moment if we shift the, the
decision about who can o- own, own a firearm
to somebody who's not well qualified and who cannot make that decision,
I don't think that's a g- uh-
So within the r- li- arms authority.
Yes. Yes.
Uh, you don't think they're qualified.
So I don't think having a, a, an, an, an
independent service that isn't, that does not have the manner of the police
behind it is a good idea.
Okay.
And I don't also think that having a long period of time
t- for that decision to be made is a good idea because I deal
with people, you know, they're middle-aged, they've got a drinking problem,
their marriage is going down the toilet, they've spent some money
unwisely. They've got a gun under the bed.
Uh, it's not locked in a storage ca- They've not got f- the facility to make
sure that's locked up properly. Uh, I'd like, the police,
who I'm gonna have to ring to sort that out, to actually be
responsible for ens- you know, making that decision prior-
Okay
... to that.
Now we've got a few questions, so we're banking up.
Yes.
Right. Mr. Todd Simpson first.
So thank you.
Yeah.
I mean, we've obviously heard a lot about, mental health.
Um, but it seems to be what you're actually submitting would actually stop people
seeking mental health. Would that-
Uh-
... support? Because y- so you're in favor-
N-
... of mandatory reporting-
Yes
... with a firearm.
Yes. Yes.
And so you don't see this as un-
And I'm, I'm in favor of actually preventing it well in advance-
Right
... by not having as many guns circulating.
No, no, that's not my question.
Uh, yeah.
So you're f- you, you're in favor of mandatory reporting if someone comes to you
with a mental health-
I am
... concern.
Yes.
Okay. So secondly then, how do you balance that with, I suppose, the
healthcare professional responsibility around patient confidentiality and to
actually help the-
It's a really difficult-
... person in front of you?
It's a really difficult problem.
Uh, you said you had the h-
And, and I, I have to make, I have to make that choice.
So if that, if that occurs, I do have to actually report that.
Um-
So do you, do you operate under the Hippocratic Oath as a psychologist?
We, we have a, a code of ethics wh- that requires us if
somebody is a danger to themselves or someone else, we have to report.
Right.
So what I don't want is to have to be making that decision all the time, 'cause
it's a very difficult decision to make.
So if we have less guns around, less cost of those guns being
registered-
That's one solution
... I then don't have to make that s- that decision.
Isn't... Don't you think that actually a trained healthcare professional is-
We trust it
... the right person to decide? 'Cause we heard evidence this morning-
Yeah, yeah
... from a doctor that they're doing this all the time.
Yes.
They can actually decide if the person-
Yes
... in front of them is of-
Absolutely
... is a danger to themselves-
Yes
... or others, and they're-
So I'm saying I, I think it's better that police officers are making decision.
If there, if there is a gun and they've got to actually
legislate for... If, if they've actually got to deal with all that guns to keep
those off the street, I don't think they're going to listen to me when I say, "Oh,
I don't, I don't think that's a very good idea." So although I think I have the
ability to make assessments about risk, I think in terms of the
manner and where those guns are placed, in terms of the way our society
considers guns, usually it's the police that deal with that.
Just one last, just for clarification.
Yeah.
But do you think police officers have better mental health training
than yourself?
I don't, no.
Okay. Sorry, just-
Yeah.
It was very clear.
Thanks, Chair. I just wanna go back to-
Yeah
... the scenario you spelt out around the concern around a,
a, a firearms user using a gun in a challenging
circumstance, where they're at in their marriage and, and life.
Yeah, yeah.
And you referred to the gun being, under the bed-
Yeah
... in, in maybe a slightly flippant way.
In that scenario-
Not, not a flippant way
... in that scenario-
Not a flippant way
... that individual shouldn't have had a firearms license in the first place.
Absolutely.
Because their gun is not s-
So, and-
Mm
... the current law wouldn't allow that person to have a firearms license if
they've got the gun under the bed anyway.
If we've got sort of 10-year gap between that person being registered,
and then the chance of things going down the toilet very
quickly is quite high. So I'm arguing for a shorter period where
that assessment can be made so that doesn't, that doesn't cause problems.
So I'm, I'm interested in... Because these things happen very
quickly. Things, you know, start off not too bad, and then they
become, very quickly quite dangerous.
I think-
Yeah
... what's sort of... And s- we're struggling with, you're a,
you're an absolute professional in, in mental health, right?
Yeah.
That's your day in, day out.
And the proposition that a, a newly
recruit- a newly graduated police recruit from-
Yeah
... Porirua-
... is more qualified when they go into the house,
who,
w- that, that seems a pretty-
I would hope it would not be a newly recruited police officer.
But that's what, everybody who they are.
I would hope somebody who deals day in, day out with firearm,
firearms and the risk of that, and who would have a
responsibility. So if you're going into a, a difficult
situation where there are firearms, and you've got to then kind of
confiscate them or say to that person, "I don't think you should have that
gun," I would hope that the police officer would be in a better
position than, let's say a newly recruited-
But there may-
... psychologist to do that
... but you've got two scenarios. One is where-
Yeah
... our police are reacting to a domestic violence.
Yeah.
Right? You've gotta have purpose-
Yes
... for a police to go into a person's home.
Yeah.
Right? So that's a different situation.
The situation where you're seeing something is that-They've come
to you-
Yeah
... for professional help.
Yeah.
They've identified it.
May, there may now not-
Yes
... have been any trigger or any event-
Yeah
... but they're concerned for themselves, right?
Yeah, yeah.
So that's, that... And they're coming to a health professional.
So-
Mm.
Um,
you're, in that situation,
you're the best p- placed and the most-
I am
... qualified.
I am. So unlike in this situation where you have to tell an
88-year-old, "I'm sorry, you're no longer able to drive," and
they get really upset about that.
Yeah.
And then you have to say to them, "No, no, no, no." And I think that's-
Mm
... a difficult situation to then enforce.
So I'm saying police are the best people to actually-
Yeah
... enforce that.
Okay.
So that's what I'm interested in, and actually they will impound the car,
they will take the gun away, they will be able to enforce those rules in a
different way. So we're all res- you know, we're all part of it.
Yeah.
I don't actually say I don't have a role, but I can say that when you're in that
situation and things really go down the toilet quickly, you...
both services need to be working very closely together.
All right. Pete, thank you for your presentation.
Yeah.
That's been fascinating. It was very ...
Yeah. Thank you.
Right. Now, we're going to move on to, um-
Can you beg a moment, Mr. Chair?
Sam Summers.
If I may beg a moment, Mr. Chair. I'm a chaplain and ex-serviceman.
I need to add a comment because o- I've got an obligation.
I deal with ex-servicemen regularly who come to me terrified to report their
mental health for fear of losing their firearms.
Yeah.
Now, I tell them to go and get help-
Yeah
... but you need to be aware there are people out there-
There... Yeah
... who are terrified of-
Yeah
... of the health professionals-
Okay
... and possible legislation.
Right. Now we've got Mr. Sam Sumners, Summers.
Is it-
Summers, yes.
Yeah, that's right.
Yes.
We've seen you before, Sam.
Oh, yes, yes. Uh-
Hi, Sam.
Now, I do have to mention one thing here.
I am the treasurer of the Newtown Residents Association-
Yeah
... and our initials are NRA. We have nothing to do with firearms.
And this is fully in my own personal capacity, but if you do
Google searches on there, you will find that, along with-
You are infamous
... a $700 coffee, as you might have r- might have read in The Herald
and RNZ in the last week.
Oh.
Yeah. Yes.
Haven't, but I'm gonna read them now.
Yes. Yep. So
I have not held a firearms license.
I did have an interest of it, back when I did, was at ATC,
and that is my only experience of holding firearms.
I think I've actually held a wooden wiffle more often than actually the real thing,
'cause I do remember that was the changes when they got rid of the, the heavier
firearms for the lighter wooden wiffles.
Um, but that was, something in there.
Um, basically some technical changes to the bill.
I believe that the only people who should be able to hold a New Zealand firearms
license are those who have either New Zealand citizenship or permanent
residence through the vetted process, as when we,
vet a permanent resident or a citizen, they normally have their checks done through
the spy agencies and that sort of thing, so w- And this would've also picked
up with what happened with March 15th if that, if that restriction was in
place, the March 15th shooter wouldn't have actually been able to attain it under
his automatic residency. The reason why I say that is because we've got
that anomaly of Aussies automatically get it, but I believe that section should be
excluded unless they properly get vetted.
Um, also for criminal records to go back for life, similar to
how we do with P endorsements for taxi and bus drivers.
Um, and also I believe the authority that should be vetting the
firearms licenses should be New Zealand SIS.
Do you know that none of these are done at the moment?
None of these...
Those three things you just mentioned there, d- are they-
None of them.
You know that that doesn't take place?
I, I don't know if it does or doesn't.
But, what your point is that it should.
Should, yes.
Okay. Got it.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah.
Okay.
I h- I mean, yeah. Um,
a- and the vetting to be done by the SIS because we have the Five Eyes partner
network that can also find out that sort of stuff there, and, and that can
also get around some of the blindsides that can happen with, through, that can
happen with the police, with local police stations, that sort of stuff, if they do
the local vetting. I'm not exactly sure.
I know Greg probably will be able to tell me if I'm wrong.
Um-
Greg tells many people that they're wrong.
Yeah. And also do believe-
Greg always assumes he's not wrong
... there should be a firearms register.
Only if they are wrong.
Yeah. Um, there should be a firearms register and be treated the same way we do
with, registering a car, so that at least we can keep an eye on what's
the firearms licenses. Uh, but the legal firearms that
are in there, I have heard earlier about trying to make an illegal firearm legal.
It... We need to have a process to actually get that.
And also do believe we need to have provisions in place when if someone misuses
the, protection order services through the family court, if that is
misused and abused, that lead to a confiscation of firearms, there need to be
remedies in place to restore those rights.
Right. Good submission.
Yeah.
Okay. Questions?
Mr. O'Connor.
Oh, I've had plenty of opportunities to talk to Sam over the years.
Um-
Not in a professional capacity, I hope.
I, I, I can tell you Americana is a very good coffee.
Right. Okay. Cool. Hey, thanks, Sam. That's been very helpful. Thank you.
No problem.
Yeah. Really appreciate that. Right.
Now,
Ms. Bridget Grabowski.
Hello. Are you there with us, Bridget?
Hopefully you don't mind me calling you Bridget.
Unmute. Okay. Yeah. I am here.
Hello. Nice to talk to you.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak to my,
submission today.
I am a shooter. I have held a firearms
license in multiple countries
since the 1990s. I used to be an
international IPSC shooter.
And, I wanted to focus on
my three key bugbears with the,
with the proposed act. The first one is the registry.
I can't support it. I-
Can't find anywhere any clear evidence that anywhere
in the world a registry has reduced violent crime.
The people who comply with the registry are the ones that are
not offending, and the criminals, they ignore the registry.
And if the goal is public safety, the resources are better
used to target illegal importation, trafficking,
and, criminal possession.
If you look overseas, the Canadian Firearms Registry,
is a cautionary tale. It was
promoted as a low-cost solution, and before it was
scrapped, it had cost milli- billions, not millions, billions.
And even the Ontario Police Commissioner called
it an obscene waste of taxpayer money with
no evidence that it materially assisted in
solving crime. And here with the New Zealand
Police, the annual privacy review showed
privacy breaches in the year to July,
24, noting that many of them were with the new firearms
registry. And that scares me because with
data breaches, it could be used as a shopping list for
criminals. They know where the good arms are.
So, no support from me on that.
Okay.
Um, the other one is the administration of the act.
I am supportive of an independent authority led
by a chief executive that has practical firearms and
shooting experience and runs a
fair, civilian-focused licensing regulation,
regulatory system. The police do essential work to
stop criminals, but I don't think that they are the right agency
to administer a civil regulatory regime for
compliant citizens. Take the driver's license system,
you outsourced it from the police to the NZTA.
We need something similar for the firearms.
Yeah. And also the sharing of information between the police and
the regula- le- regulator should be aligned to that.
Okay.
And then the third one is sports shooter.
For IPSC and for three gun, you need
semi-auto rifles, you need semi-auto shotguns, you need
high-capacity magazines to participate meaningful in these
competitions.
With the current regulatory system,
none of these can be done meaningful in this country.
We can try to train and do something here, but when
we travel overseas to competitions, we either have to
borrow guns from overseas friends,
which we haven't trained with, or,
there's not much point in us going there because, well,
we don't have the right tools to do so, and we can't train the next
generation. So what I would like to see is
a system similar to the former ECAD system,
where you can own these firearms with a
tightly regulated, highly vetted system, secure
storage that gets verified
yearly as it used to be with ECAD, and verified
club participations,
and very, very strong penalties if these--
if there are any diversions of that.
So in conclusion, I ask you, to
remove or at least significantly roll back the
registry, maybe limit it to pistols
and to semi-auto rifles,
establish an independent firearms authority,
and reinstate a tightly controlled reporting pathway
as, as pathway for, sports shooters that can use
semi-auto rifles and shotguns and high-capacity mags.
All right. Very good, Bridget. You're obviously not up to the common
approach in schools about participation and not winning.
Uh, no, not really.
All right. Cool.
There's no point in pa-- There's no point in participating if you don't aim to be
on the top.
That's right. That's right. Now, members, got any questions?
No, that's very good. Very, helpful, Bridget, and
re-emphasize a number of points that have been made earlier.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we're going to, Ms.
Alison, Joy Mace. Is that right?
Yeah, I'll get her, Marcus.
All right. Um, Alison, I hope I can t- call you that.
Could you accept the, invitation, please?
You'll need to accept and then hope-- Have she
done that? Cool. And then if hopefully go off mute.
Are you there?
How are you going?
Oh, here we are.
Here we are. Okay, you should be.
Oh, very good. Hey, nice to see you both.
Um, but we've got five minutes with you, Alison. We've read, read your submission.
I know.
We love your backdrop.
Thank you.
All
right.What
would you like to, just-
I-
Maybe just highlight the major points that you wanna talk about.
All right. I was concerned that I'm thinking in particular
of an organization such as the Department of Conservation,
where they would have various employees
involved in helping to protect our forests
and the need to use weaponry sometimes, for
example, for c- feral cats.
Yeah.
And the o- only one person apparently
ha- has to cover the authorization for all the workers,
and I can imagine a situation where that person may
not be available, may be annual leave or off sick,
and I think that, perhaps the organization,
there should be a method by which an organization such
as that would hold the authority,
and be responsible for the use of firearms.
Rather than the individual?
Exactly, yes. I can see problems in just
having an individual.
Okay. Cool.
And do you have any questions for me?
Any questions. All right. Hey, thank you.
Very, very useful presentation,
members. I think we've heard... Uh, we've got one from Mr. Carl Bates.
Thanks, Chair. Thanks for your, submission, Alison.
You make a comment around every effort being made to detect illegal
manufacture of, firearms via 3D printing.
Just wondering if you have any thoughts on how that would be achieved.
Well, I understand that it has been found to happen for parts
thereof. I haven't, I've, I'm not aware
of a complete weapon.
Okay.
All right. Cool. Hey, so if I just summarize what you're suggesting,
particularly with organizations, an organization should have
the right, where there, there's legitimate pest control
operation, they should h- hold a general license and then
a licensed firearm owner that works for that on a,
employed by that organization should be able to use
that, that rifle or whatever at that point in time.
That's what you're suggesting, isn't it?
Yes, and, we need to make sure we've covered the
situation where that p- specific employee might be off
sick or on leave.
Yeah. Okay. Cool.
This is the reason.
All right. Hey, thank you for your time and for joining us.
That's really helpful.
Right. Now, I'm gonna go, to Mr.
Alan Ditmer, who was there before. Good afternoon.
We've got five minutes with you.
Good afternoon.
Thank you very much, and, thank you very much for, allowing me the
opportunity. Um, just wanna say overall,
obviously, as you guys have done a great job of noting, you've already been through
all the submissions. It's very clear that you're going through and reading those
end to end, and I congratulate you and thank you
for your time doing so.
Um, obviously my, my personal one was pretty brief.
At the end of the day, a lot of people have said a lot of things that I'm already
in support of, such as, organizations such as COLFO and
the NZ Deer Stalkers Association.
A lot of their things are much of a muchness.
Um, myself, I'm a longtime, shooter
and have been in the, the profession for a long period of time.
Um, basically, overall, the key points I wanted to make was that,
obviously you guys seem to be doing a great job of remembering that the act
itself needs to prioritize, the ease of compliance
in order to be able to get people to, comply as simply
as possible without, causing, exactly as
we have seen in, in previous years with as soon as a pendulum
swings so hard in one way, people decide that the non-compliance becomes the
simplest answer for themselves. Um,
obviously we don't wanna see that in any, let's say,
scale moving forward. We'd like for things to, to be within the
law.
Um, second point is I'd like to voice that I
strongly oppose any and all suggestions such as earlier we heard
about things like, wanting to restrict the remanufacturing of your
own ammunition at home. At the end of the day, those things are, as we know,
overburdensome. They don't shift anything in the
aspect of actually delivering, safety to the public in
any scalable or measurable tangible outcome.
Um, at the end of the day, it's saying that, as we know, 230,000 of
us,
in that ter- term of numbers, if there was a problem, it would be
absolutely known. Um, so there's no point chasing
down things that aren't an issue. This afternoon, later on, once my daughter,
who's just turned 10, is actually scheduled for, I think, second to last
showing for you today, and, you know, she wants to
bring forward her opinion about let's not throw out the baby with the bathwater for
those suggestions that have been around not allowing, non-licensed
people to shoot underneath the direct supervision of somebody who is
actively supervising and controlling that situation, i.e., arm's length,
et cetera. Um, she comes hunting with me a lot and really
enjoys that. Um, third thing was around,
I really like the idea of moving to a progressive,
licensing period for those who are under the new scheme going to
be seen as commercial operators. Um, I have a lot of friends
in the industry, and one of the major bugbears that they have and a
huge, point of mental stress for them is, as you know, under the
current dealer's license,
they basically, once they're granted it, they have to immediately go for the next
one because it's taking between, on average between six and nine, even out
to 10 months just to renew an annual license.
And if you're thinking from a business perspective there, the risk
of non-compliance, which then generates more work for
the regulator, that is pointless work because it's clearly people that
are doing the absolute best to comply-Is just so
burdensome that it's, it's non-functional.
So I like the idea of going, you know, annual for the first one, out to
three yearly, and then even out to five yearly based off of, you know, a scale
of how well are we performing. If we're performing very, very
well, there's no n- no reason or,
rationale for overburdening both our regulators and those who are
subject to the regulations. Um, so that would be a huge
potential cost saving within the government, let alone, again,
huge, let's say, carrot in front of them in order to look
for the best way to work with whoever the regulator is.
Um, fourth thing was, again, I heard earlier on aspects around
a permanent amnesty for firearms in the possession of non-licensed persons to
be brought into the registration of a licensed person.
I very much support that. It's a huge and a very simple, straightforward
way to be able to bring what the concern being, you know, gray
guns or, or black, market things into
the green light of we're now within the legislative process, and we now
have those in the hands of a responsible person who's in control.
Um, basically, in essence, the whole thing is, is that we know,
my, my own lived existence and history is that
the licensed community itself is a very, very highly commended
community. They're excellent people who hold an immense of-- an immense sense
of responsibility and who actually wanna be within the law.
That's the entire reason that we are licensed in the first place.
Um, so with that being said, I invite any and all questions from
the committee.
Right. Um,
I don't think we have Mr. Dipma, but I just wanna thank you for
coming on board and just summarizing those points.
Um, as you sort of acknowledged, we've heard a lot of them before, but very useful
to have your contributions. Thanks very much.
Thank you very much.
Right. Now we're going to, Mr. Daniel Tizard,
who's also-- Sorry, Mr. Daniel Tizard-Close,
who hopefully is joining us by Zoom. Sorry.
Coming through.
Daniel, are you with us?
I am indeed. I apologize-
All right
... for the delay there.
No, no, no, no problem at all. Hey, so we've got five minutes.
We've read your, submission, but, it'd be good if you just
take us through the key points.
No. Marvelous. Thank you very much.
Um, also thank you for providing the opportunity today.
There are two key principles on which I would like to speak, if possible.
The first is the current proposal
being put forward does not revoke the
removal of the right to remain
silent.
That was removed in the original component,
the original bill that was put through,
and it removes a, the right to remain silent when questioned by
police from a not inconsiderable portion of the population based
solely on whether they hold a license or not.
This comes across as setting a very dangerous precedent, not
only in the erosion of the legitimacy of the legal process,
but also one does have to ask, once the line has been
crossed, where will it wind up?
Um, with that in mind,
I would very much like to see this being put back
into the bill, saying that firearms owners have the exact
same legal rights as any other citizen of this
nation, the right to remain silent
being an example.
Um,
exclusionary practices such as removing that right really
don't do
any favors and also can actually cause a f- an,
a, a reasonable amount of concern, I think.
The second principle is that the-- I'm going to, I'm
gonna sound like a broken record, I'm afraid, here. I do apologize.
Quite a few people have raised this issue before, which is separating the
Firearm Safety Authority from the police completely and
entirely.
Not to put too fine a point on it, but we have seen a number of
issues arise.
In, for example, the terrorist action of March twenty
nineteen could not have occurred if the procedures that had been in
place
as part of legislation had been fully carried out.
Also, I will point out as well that there are numerous issues with the,
with the firearms registry and other materials remaining with police custody,
as we have already seen numerous data breaches.
We have also know that it is common practice, for example, for organized
crime to send people into the police force.
That's very old standard practice.
Why take that risk? I will also mention my own personal experience with the
Firearm Safety Authority. Um, I actually applied to
join when it was first formed,
citing my knowledge of firearms, coming through as a collector, a
re-enactor, all the rest of it, and I was informed
via email that they did not want people with firearms knowledge to
join the Firearm Safety Authority
owing to the fact they wanted to train them from scratch,
which might go some way to explain the
forty-five-minute conversation I had trying to explain nine
millimeter caliber to one
unfortunate individual on the other end of the phone.
But yes, I'm afraid they are, they are two very
brief points, but if there are any questions, I'm more than willing to-
All right. Can I just ask you, this remain, r-uh, right to remain silent,
you're saying that the way that the act's written at the
moment-Um,
you cannot
adopt a reasonable approach and, and
not self-incriminate. Is that what you're trying to say?
Is that, is that your-
That is certainly my understanding of how the legislation
is written, and I have checked with other members of the community
and a similar concern has been raised.
I think what-
By those infinitely wiser than myself, I might add.
Okay, Daniel. Um, be interesting, 'cause this, this point hasn't really
been brought out before in any great
detail. If you've got any further information on it, it'd be useful to get
that. But, because if that's,
that's not something we have sort of been made aware of.
Uh, and if we ha- have crossed the threshold, it'd be useful
to understand exactly where and how people have interpreted
that.
A, an example that I can give is a,
an email that was sent out to members of,
the collecting community,
which came from,
uh... Oh, Lord, I'm afraid I've been put on the spot and I can't remember the
gentleman's name. He is a barrister.
And the briefing was effectively in the aftermath
of, the March terrorist action, 2019,
that if we were approached by police, if police
came to our residences and requested our firearms, we were not in
a legal position
to refuse or to remain silent. We were to comply in every way,
shape, and form. There was to be no-
All right. We-
... counter or concern raised until legal
counsel had been sought.
Okay. So, what I'm inviting you to do, if, if the,
either through that barrister, or whatever, if you wanna make a supplementary
written submission, we'd be keen to have it. All right?
So that's, that, that's the invitation.
Understood. Thank you very much.
All right. Hey, thank you for your time, Daniel. Uh, very helpful.
Um, and, some things that are a little bit different, which is great.
Cheers for that.
No worry. Thank you very much.
Now, we've got, Mr. Edward Haber.
He's not here online. We've got Craig Innes.
R- right. We've got Craig Innes. Mr.
Craig Innes,
thank you for turning up.
We've got, five minutes with you.
You were due this morning, weren't you, is that right?
I was, yes.
Yeah, yeah, that's right. Thought so.
Okay. Um, so, Kia ora kota. Uh, so thank
you for the opportunity to speak to submit my submission.
So you have my written submissions I submitted on the issue
of the current system, which I f- I found to be very
dysfunctional.
Uh, and the issue of, MSSAs or military-style
semi-automatics for farm forestry.
It was another part of, part of that submission.
Uh, I would also like to raise the up,
raise the issue of a, in support
of the,
changes to the review process which are proposed.
Um, I've f- personally found the current system to
be, some- both somewhat arbitrary and a bit unfair.
Uh, in a case I'm aware of, a, a young man had a
short-lived mental, crisis.
Um, the first of, the first point I would make was,
the response was too slow. It didn't really happen in
time to do any difference to the situation.
And second, second of all, when the response did finally kick in,
it led to what m- my vi- view was a fairly unjust
outcome.
Uh, by the time the pr- process kicked in, the person had largely
recovered. Uh, they were still suffering from some depression, but they had
largely recovered from their crisis.
Uh, the family concluded that under the circumstances, the best option would be
for that person to, surrender their license.
So an application for surrender was put in, and then that would give the person
the,
as soon as they were fully recovered, they could reapply.
Uh, however, when the decision was made, made, the
authority, the officer acknowledged that he had received
a application for surrender, but he said he, he revoked the
license and he couldn't, you couldn't surrender it because he had revoked it,
which was a catch-22 and, in my view, very unfair.
Uh, and it left this young person, in the same situation as if
he had committed an offense.
Um, you know, same outcome.
And it also left the family feeling somewhat,
guilty. Feeling guilty for,
doing this, you know, for, for getting the, the authority involved
when the outcome didn't seem to, assist justice
or public safety in any way, but left this young person,
without a firearms license for five years.
Thank you.
Uh, five or ten?
It's five, I believe, for a revoked license.
Right. So it's a te- it was a technicality in effect, was it?
It... Well, I, I don't even think it was a technicality.
I think, I think the, the application of s- surrender was
before the authority.
Um, they saw that application for surrender, but they decided to
revoke and said that you couldn't surrender 'cause we revoked it.
Right.
So it was a catch-22.
Yeah.
Uh, it was, uh... I spoke to Stephen Franks about it,
and he was of the opinion that the, um...
Th- th- this is wh- here's the reason I'm suggesting the, your, the changes to the
review process do need, do need to take s- things like this into account
because a- as it is, it's quite inflexible, and he suggested that the
chances of success are pretty slim-
Okay. All right
... in, in challenging it, in going to ju- judicial review.
Right. Any questions, members?
No.
No. Okay, thank you for drawing that attention.
Um, it's a bit of a nuance, isn't it?
Yeah, I, I think so, yes.
Yeah.
I, I do think, I do think that there needs to be, you know, some compassion,
especially with mental illness.
Yeah.
Espici- and, and also, also, s- especially saying,
in terms of rural people.
Mm.
Uh, because there's a, there's already a macho reluctance to get
involved, to get people, get to get help.
Yeah. All right. Hey, thank you for your time.
Okay. Thank you.
Right. Um, now we're gonna go back to Ebert
Haver. No, we can't get Mr. Haver. Uh, Leonie
Brown.
Who's next?
Hey, Leonie, could you just accept
the invitation from us, please?
Search.
All right, good.
Afternoon.
You with us, Leonie?
You might have that mute button on.
Ah.
It's a trip for everyone. How are you?
I'm good, thank you.
Hey, now we've got five minutes with you.
Um-
I'll take less than five minutes.
We're even gonna see you. We're even gonna...
Gee, marvels of, of Zoom.
Hello.
So now, we've got five minutes.
We've read your submission, but if you can perhaps highlight the key bits, that'd
be fantastic.
Yes, it'll be less than five minutes. And kia ora to everybody.
Um,
I actually wish to withdraw my comment on my written submission that I generally
supported the changes,
and this is due in part to the fact that the bill was,
tabled in late November at the end of the parliamentary term.
You have holidays, and then you had until the 16th of February
to make your oral submission.
So I didn't have sufficient time to actually study what
the bill involved. I... and since I've written that
and ta- and sent it through,
I have done a little bit more reading on it, and now I'm rather
concerned about the bill.
Okay.
So this is what, this is what I want to talk to.
Good.
Okay. Guns kill people, and that's a fact.
We have an increasingly viol- violent society that's only
going to get worse given the current global warmongering
political climate.
Shifting the overview of firearms regulations to an independent
firearms regulator seems to me a backwards step
and adds more layer of bureaucracy, which this current government is trying to
get rid of.
We already have an authority tasked with the management of arms.
Just improve the regulations un- under which the police offer
operate.
In my view, gun lobbyists hold too much sway in relation to
gun ownership.
I have no issue with farmers who need to have guns to euthanize
their a- animals in distress.
I have no issue with hunters needing guns for
shooting animals for food.
They don't need assault rifles. How are these types managing to still
cross our borders?
In my view, the borders are where the focus should be.
In my view, gun licensing needs reviewing,
more scrutiny imposed on new applicants and those holding a license
for less than five years.
I am quite horrified that the bill aims to
reduce the burden of license applicants,
license holders and the arms regulator by enabling
license extensions, urgent renewals, and even
more horrifying, multi-entry visitor
license.
I imagine that has to do with organized hunting parties shooting animals for
fun.
I also consider more scrutiny should be imposed on gun
retailers.
They run a business and are there to make money on the sale of
arms.
My guess would be not too much scrutiny would appe- would
occur, with a potential sale.
More policing needs to occur at our borders and ports.
Governments would do well to look seriously at this.
To finish,
I wish to reiterate, I do not support the arms bill in its current
form,
and I do not support any other authority being created by the
firearms regulator other than the police.
Thank you for your time.
Well, thank, thank you, Leonie. It's a little bit different from y- your
submission. Um-
Absolutely, as I said.
Yeah. But, I note in your original submission you wanted two
police officers to sign off on, on,
license renewals or license applications.
Yes.
Is that, is that still your view?
That is still my view. It just, it, it, you know, adds another
layer.
And may, may I ask why?
I'm kind of like concerning of the provincial and rural
areas where there's a l-
an increased risk of a relationship between the
local police and the,
residents who may know each other.
Right. Okay.
And that's the reason.
All right. That's, that's good. Hey, thank you for joining us,
and, going through those points. That's, useful.
Thank you.
All right.
Now we're going to, Mr. Dylan Woodhouse.
Is he there? Mr. Woodhouse. There you are.
We can see you even. We haven't quite got the-
Good afternoon.
We've got Tom Rutherford showing up on the main screen, but not Mr.
Dylan Woodhouse.
Can you hear me okay?
Somehow, take it over. There you are.
All righty. Uh, just checking real quick. Can everyone hear what I'm saying?
Yes, exactly.
Awesome
All right. Well, thank you to the committee for having me on to do my
submission today. Um, I'm, I'm here because I'm really
just coming in to ask for my community back.
Um, because of the previ- previous government's, regulation,
the, range that I've been shooting at for many
years was closed due to the, the secti- I believe it's Section 38
which requires the certification and registration of ranges.
So if you've had a look at my written submission, I, I
have a, a, a range of things that I would love to
happen, would hope to happen, that would've been part of this bill.
Uh, except in, too often in, in the realm of firearms legislation, hope
is the first step on the road to disappointment.
And in this regard, I w- I was very much hoping that we would see an end to
what I view as this punitive regulation.
And it seemed that there was no real mischief that the
certification and registration of, of ranges addressed or why
this needed to be implemented under the, previous
regime. And so effectively, the
consequence of that regulation was that these small rural, rural
ranges, which, are more of a- an ad hoc
affair, they're sort of organic communities of practice that
form around firearms ownership. A lot of these have had to close as a result
of that clause.
And i- in my view, that, that actually does far more harm
than good in terms of public safety, because you're getting rid of
these,
small voluntary associations, which are kind of the bedrock of
developing and, and sort of the cultural reproduction of our gun
community. So that's where you learn safety, you learn to,
to shoot, on a, on a range with a range officer in a,
a safe environment.
And to me, just watching that community
rapidly dwindle and then be regulated into obscurity is,
has just been heartbreaking. And I guess the, the reason I'm here is that I'm here
to ask for my sport back. I want to see this as an
opportunity for, the, the other parties
besides ACT to stop sort of bestriding the,
the political center and just viewing any regulation as,
as good regulation for its own sake, and instead take stock of the,
the harm this has on the cultural capital of shooting sports in New Zealand.
Does anyone have any questions for me on that?
Yeah, we do. Um, so
we have asked a number of submitters this morning about,
clubs,
and asked a very specific question, would this,
this act, is it gonna make it better or worse for gun
clubs? To be fair, most
people have said now that the
rules have been put in place, it's probably gonna make no difference.
Uh, one talked about in Queenstown, difficult establishing a new site was
more the cost of the land, not the-
Yes
So, your, your comments are slightly at odds with that,
and I just want to ... I'd be very keen if you could help the committee in
terms of what, what are the rules and things that you think are
pernicious,
and that are leading to further decline in clubs, because we are
concerned about that.
Certainly. Well, to clarify, I guess what I'm saying is that this bill could have
helped resurrect and repair the damage that was done to
smaller shooting clubs in rural spaces.
And the, the damage that the previous laws have done is by
requiring certification, they require these regulatory standards to
be upheld, and often this requires effectively a commercial
effort to produce a shooting facility that would typically be
found at a public range type place.
And often these ranges are on farms, that they're on private land.
And as a consequence of that, and because of the changing of the, the
range, the, the legal definition of what a range is and how that has to now be
certified,
these smaller clubs can't really afford to make the
necessary modifications to be in compliance with the law.
And also the landowners would be reluctant to do so because
it would alter the primary commercial purpose of their land, which would be, in
most cases, a, a farm.
So have you got examples there, Dylan?
Well, the, the only example I'm aware of, and the reason I'm submitting is my own-
Yeah
... club, and that was-
... the Waikato Rifles range. But I'm, I'm certain there'll be
many other examples like that.
Wh- and where's the Waikato Rifle range? Where, whereabouts is it?
Well, it's, it's no longer operating, but it operated for many years out of
a, a farm, in, in the Waikato in, in around
Taupiri, sort of Matangi area near Hamilton.
Right.
And it used to be, honestly, it was a phenomenal place.
It's where I learned to shoot rifles safely for the first time.
We had a NZDF, ex-veteran was our range officer.
Yeah.
We had some wonderful people come. Families would come.
They'd bring their children and, partners and all of
that, and it was just, it was an awesome atmosphere.
But because of the regulation, we've had to close that.
And we'd had, sort of a dwindling in membership due to
the confiscation of MSSAs and the,
just the general punitive atmosphere surrounding the Labour
government's arms reform. And this really, the,
the arms bill that followed it up, the Arms Regulatory Bill, I believe it was
called, in 2022, if I'm not mistaken-
Um
... was sort of the final nail in the coffin for us.
Yeah. Unfortunately, it's hard to go back in time. Um, all right.
Hey, thanks Dylan-
Mm
... for coming on and just talking about that. That's, very helpful.
All right. Thank you for your time.
Okay. Right. Now, Lytton,
Valente.
No, he's not online. We've got Robert Yarndell.
Right. Mr. Robert Young. Um, slightly ahead of schedule, 45
minutes.
2:45, but that's great.
Are you there, Mr. Young?
Thank you.
Cool.
You there, Mr. Young?
Hello, do you hear me?
Yeah, we can. How are you?
Oh, marvelous. Thank you.
You're looking magnificent.
Very kind of you to say. Um, yeah.
Now, we've got five minutes with you.
Okay, cool. Well, I'm fundamentally against the act.
Um, good law requires simple, easy to
understand, common language and parlance, and this
law really fails to meet that standard.
To put it in perspective, the original 1983 Arms Act, which did
have some areas of misunderstanding amongst the
general, populace of, who had firearms,
was just over 80 pages. This new piece of legislation is over
380 pages. Um, on those grounds
alone, I think it could do with a bit of a rewrite.
Um, just perhaps,
perhaps some more common parlance and, less copy-paste from the last
2019 act maybe. Um, it, it read like someone had,
had accidentally deleted it a week be- prior to submitting and then had to
retype the whole thing using copy paste, but that's a
by-the-by observation. Um, I do have a prop
if, if that's okay. It's, it's made of plastic and it says Made in
Taiwan, so I wouldn't want anyone to be alarmed.
But, most of our arms information and reporting in this country
seems to come from New Zealand police, and, and while they do
a fine job as frontline officers, if you
encounter firearms in a negative setting,
it could possibly lead to bias in reporting and,
and so I shall introduce this prop very briefly.
Now, the interesting thing about this,
and, I can provide the numbers post communication,
that has an evidence tag that was seized as a firearm,
recorded as a firearm-
From, from a crime scene, is, quite amusing as a result.
Um, came from a retired detective and, happy to talk more about that later.
But
perhaps relying solely on, feedback through the police,
on firearms and public safety is a, is not the way to
go. Now, the main point I'd like to drive home
is deactivation. It's a... There are mult- multiple points I'd like
to make. I only have five minutes, but deactivation is a serious public safety
concern. Um, firearms are not
mythical entities, pulled from the molten soil.
They are essentially machinery. They are made from parts.
If you have 100 parts making up a firearm, deactivation regulation
requires 20% of those parts to be deactivated.
You can remove said 20% of parts and build a firearm.
Um, and if we are proposing deactivation and that then
they be sold to the public without a license, I would be dead set against that.
Uh, the Charlie Hebdo killings in Europe were EU-spec deactivation, which
is what has currently been copy-pasted in the, in the new
regulations and submitted to dealers for them to have a look at.
Um, and as far as deactivation comes, I've bought
deactivated firearms and reactivated them for my own personal collection.
They were sold as firearms.
I have repaired them. They are now fully functional.
Deactivation is a serious public safety risk if you are to
allow them to be traded without proper licensing.
Uh, they present as a real firearm in crime.
Approximately 30% of, UK offenses
with a, a, with a weapon presented, a firearm- ...
to have been deactivated.
And, um-
So just be... Can you just be really c-clear on that, Mr. Young?
Yeah.
So you're saying
if you get
a,
a firearm that's been deactivated-
Yes
... and then you as a gunsmith or whatever, you
reconstitute it so it's an operational firearm.
Yes.
If you sell,
presumably, aren't you under the same rules when you come to sell that firearm that
you have to possibly go through a registered firearm dealer or
whatever?
Yeah.
Or are you saying it's excluded from that process?
Uh, in the proposed legislation, it will be.
Will it?
Currently, currently, there is no such thing as a deactivated
firearm in New Zealand law. So any firearm, no
matter what state of deactivation, even if it was just a
bare receiver with no other parts,
it would be sold as a firearm under New Zealand law under the
current act, and that is something that needs to continue.
Right. Okay.
Mm-hmm.
So that's a bit of a no-site, that's what you're suggesting.
Um, I would say deactivation as a whole leads to
misunderstandings and problems.
Um, deactivation worldwide generally leads to firearms being traded,
as a non-restricted entity.
Yeah.
And, and I am just dead set against us going down this garden
path of deactivation. It will create a lot of public safety problems e-even
just through misunderstandings.
Okay, cool.
Right. Now, you got any other questions or, any other things?
You've obviously got quite a submission here, but, um-
I, I, if, if you'll allow me the, the time, I would
briefly like to talk about a, a broader exemption
for semi-automatic firearms, on the grounds of pest control
as, if you've been reading The Herald in any time in the last five years,
you'll notice-
Yeah
... since 2019, pest numbers have exploded in this country-
... and no one seems to be doing it-
Yeah
The vast number of people that no longer do it on an amateur basis, but that needs
to be addressed. And also there needs to be more specific, antique
firearm exemptions. These are-
And what would your definition be?
We had, I've asked someone about that earlier today, about,
pre-1900. Uh, what, what, how would you
expand the definition of an antique
firearm?
Um,
I would keep the current definition but add to it.
So the current definition being pre-1900 and not centerfire or
rimfire,
and I would add pre-1900 by caliber
exemption. So if the caliber was deemed defunct and
non-obtainable, then it could be listed as an antique.
Okay. Caliber, that's interesting. All right, cool.
Very helpful. Any comments from anyone?
No, all good.
Okay. Well, thank you very much, for your contribution this afternoon.
Thank you for your time.
Yeah, cool. Right. Now, where are we going back?
Jeremy.
We're going back to Jeremy Rae. Mr. Jeremy Rae, are you with us?
I am indeed. How are you?
How are you?
I'm good.
Now, we can't see you, but we can hear you, which is a good thing.
That's the main thing.
Oh, let me just check my video settings.
Uh, okay. Just a second, mate.
So let's try something here. Um-
That's right. You can, you can chat while you're doing it.
Yeah, okay. Um-
You can do multiple things at once.
All right. Um, yeah, I'm not having any luck here with my, with my
video.
That's all right. We can, we can hear you.
I'll just talk away. Yeah. Okay. So, um-
Instead we're gonna look at something about it.
Yeah. Briefly, I've been a shooter and collector for over 40
years. I shoot rifles, pistols and shotguns
competitively, and I'm also a licensed theatrical armorer
and an historical re-enactor, and, I've been doing that for over
25 years. I support the provisions in the Arms Bill in its
current form, but I have the following additional points that I'd like to make.
And I think the most important thing, is, there
always should be emphasis on vetting the person and less
emphasis on the items. Um, I think that's the most
important thing, and I think all the, the time, money and effort we
put into registration, particularly registration of
magazines, I think it's a distraction, from that,
which is, making sure that, you know, that someone is of good
character
and, you know, and doing all the appropriate checks and,
for that.
Uh, I think also that you should be a New Zealand citizen for
at least two years before being able to apply for a firearms
license. Currently, my understanding is that the FSA
policy is that, once you've resided here for one year, you
can apply for a license. I think it should be longer.
And, I just wanted to flesh out, what theatrical
armorers do and how this affects us.
So I'm a member of a historical reenactment society.
So we do displays for the public, and we also make nonprofit
short films for educational and training purposes, and we
later on, we put them up on YouTube.
So as a theatrical armorer, I supply, firearms to
these events.
And of course, some of the firearms I have, I have a prohibited endorsement.
So the condition of that is that the vital parts have to be stored
at a separate address. And this is, problematic for theatrical armorers
because our weapons have to be in functioning condition to fire
blank, and, there might be a scenario where an
event comes up at short notice and, the person who has
my parts is in the South Island for a couple of weeks going hunting or something
like that. And again, I don't really see
the safety benefit, there of doing this.
Um, and I just think it just adds,
again, more sort of issues and problems along the way.
Um,
I will also add that, I would like to see a
restoration of something similar to the former E endorsement, which was for,
um-
Hey, so, so can you just finish that?
Oh, yeah.
On the theoretical. Is that in relation to pistols
or, rifles, or w-
It can be any firearm. Um, and of course, the firearms are
in different categories, so I have all those different items.
Uh, I have, rifles like the old A class
rifles. I have pistols, on my, theatrical
collectors, and I have, automatic, firearms
on that, and also I have semi-automatic firearms, on prohibited.
So you're saying in-
Yeah
... in respect of all theat- theatrical, um-
Mm-hmm
... arms-
... you have to take the vital parts of it a- and store it somewhere
else? Or is it in a specific category?
It's the prohibited you have to do that.
It's the prohibited.
Prohibited category. Yeah.
Even though, even though your, your theatrical arms
can't, can't ne-
have no possibility of firing a real live round?
They're converted to blank firing, except for the A
category rifles. So A category rifles, don't
require, like bolt actions don't require blank conversion, but
anything that's automatic i- is converted for blank firing.
Wow, that's really restricted, isn't it?
Mm-hmm.
Okay. Sorry, sorry to interrupt.
That's okay. No, I'm happy to provide that information.
So, yeah, so, that is something that,
i- is an issue for, the people that do theatrical,
events and so forth, if it involves the prohibited
category, of firearms.So just coming back to my other
point was, what used to be the E endorsement, which was
for use of semi-auto rifles for competition shooting, such as
service rifle shooting, three gun competitions, which are rifle
and pistol and shotgun, and I've done all this stuff before, for
many years. And I think that it could be administered,
in a way that it's done currently for, pistols, which is
shooting pistols. It used to be called the B endorsement,
and that you need to belong to a club, you need to pass,
safety training and extra background checks and security checks,
and I think this could be applied to, potentially,
restoring the use of semi-auto rifles for shooting
competitions. And, and that it- it's gonna have
further requirements and more checks and gonna take time to get to
that, level, and it can be administered safely like the same way that
the pistol clubs have been run successfully for many years.
And just, coming back to the endorsements, there's a lot more
endorsements than there used to be.
And on my firearms license, I was gonna show it to you, but my camera's not
working, but I have 13 endorsements-
Mm
... on my firearms license in tiny, tiny little letters and some bits
abbreviated. There used to be... I used to have three endorsements.
To do all the things that I'm doing, I had three endorsements, and now there's
13 with all the different categories for magazines-
Oh, got that. Mm
... and different firearms. It seems overly complicated to me.
It, it really is hard to understand and, and I, I
think we should go back to a s- more simplified,
system like we used to have for the different categories.
Um, and, one more point is
the application for firearms licenses are now over 25
pages long. I had to do it last year when I renewed my license.
It was extremely difficult and drawn out process, and I
think, again, that, that needs to be streamlined.
I think we should, you know, encourage people to apply for a license if you
wanna do it and not deter them. And I, I think that's just,
it's just too much, that, that new version. Yeah.
All right. We've got, we've got-
And that was, that was my final point.
Fantastic. We've got one co- comment or question from Mr. Carl Bates.
Thanks, Chair.
Yeah.
Jeremy, thanks for your submission.
With regard to your point two about additional constraints on foreigners
and recent immigrants-
Yeah
... does that a- also apply or your, your
suggestion, do you intend on that applying
to the multi-entry, visitor
license?
Yeah, I'm aware of that. Um, I'm sort of, more thinking that
really you should be...
It, it would be best that you had been residing in New Zealand for a certain length
of time. I've, I have sort of mixed feelings about that, that,
that special category that you've mentioned.
So-
Um, yeah.
So that special category, as I understand it, is for two purposes.
Mm-hmm.
One is for, people coming in for competitions-
Yeah
... and the second is people coming in for, for hunting.
Mm-hmm.
Um, would you be suggesting that
given the restrictions around that category as it is and the
relationships that we've heard about today with, for example, international
organizations, that, that those could continue
or would you wanna see those stopped?
I, I would hope that, they could be continued but obviously,
I would hope they have very strict, vetting and background checks.
I'm not sure of exactly what they do, but I would hope that,
they use, maybe they use Interpol or something like that to do a
thorough-- If there's a very thorough background check,
then I would feel more comfortable about it, but I'm not familiar with how they
actually do that.
All right.
Okay.
Hey, thank you, Mr. Rae. That's been very good submission. Thank you.
You brought a theore- theoretical element to it, which is always good
fun.
You're welcome.
Right. Now, we're going to-
Lightham Valenti.
Are you back to him? Above.
We're-- Malcolm Lumpstone, is that who you said?
No, Lightham. Lightham. Lightham, two above.
Oh, Lightham. Oh, sorry. Lightham Valenti, are you
there?
We're going backwards now.
We're moving around.
Is he there?
It's a fast moving world, this.
Yes, I am. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can. How are you?
Good, thank you. And yourself?
Good.
I appreciate your time. Um, I can probably, speak to...
I'm just trying to sort my video out as well. I apologize.
Um, I can probably speak to the comment that the, last submitter
said-
Yeah
... around international visitors.
I assisted someone doing this last year, and it is a
rigorous vetting process, that they go through and, and it's a
good, good opportunity that we present to people.
Um,
so for myself, for my submission, so I'm, I've been in the military for
23 years, and my current role is a, with firearms instructor
for a unit and, so it's almost solely what
I do for a job at the moment. Um, and I would like-
Sorry, you're in defense or you're in a, a club?
Is that what you mean by that?
Oh, I'm in defense. So I'm in the military.
Defense.
Yeah.
Okay. Got it.
And I've done 23 years of service, um-
Yeah
... and my, my primary role at the moment is a firearm safety
instructor for them. Um,
and I would encourage, the civilian
firearms community to
be involved in both clubs,
individually but also, where, the
military is involved as well to learning about firearm safety.
Um, we could use our model of range
practices as an example, as to set
for civilian agencies to work off,
as we are-Very
familiar with the firearms themselves.
Use of multiple firearms as well, not just, the bolt actions and as
that. But so we'd have to go across all walks of the civilian,
training pr-
sphere, so to speak.
Um,
but mainly it,
it would eliminate a lot of the accidents that we see where people
are, not identifying targets correctly.
They aren't, um... And this is where it like, for instance, we have
unfortunate instances where people are shot brushing their teeth, like we saw a few
years ago. Um,
but it would also then go into having a, a more
confident, capable firearms community,
which would also in turn reduce accidents in itself.
All right.
Um-
Uh, sorry, we're-- there's a pregnant pause there.
We're just wondering whether you wanted to say a little bit more.
Is there-
Uh,
no, that, that would be enough.
Yeah. All right. Cool.
If, if there's any questions, I'd like to answer.
No, it's good. Thank you. Um, it's just hard not being-- because we
can't see you. Um, right, any questions, members?
Go forward.
So you-- what you're basically saying, more,
more training,
professional and particularly
u-using Defense Force staff if they, if they're available.
But just making sure that people are better trained,
so you improve the overall safety of the community.
That's what your proposition is, isn't it?
Um, not necessarily using Defense Force staff 'cause, that blurs a, I think
blurs a line. Um, also very noting that the Defense Force
is rather busy at the moment with international affairs happening.
Um-
Yeah
... but I, I think definitely using our training model where-
Um, okay. Yeah. Yeah
... you're, you're instructed properly.
So when I did my civilian firearms license coursing, there
was almost no instruction. There was about a five-minute segment
of the licensing process, in which they
taught you some firearm safety. Um-
Oh
... there was almost no real instruction on how to do that.
Now, if we look at the same for driver's licensing for your car, cor--
there's a staged system of you learning,
you're instructed, and then you, have an opportunity to go out
and be guided through the sort of safe practice of driving.
Yeah.
And it should probably be the same for firearms.
Um, not necessarily with like, for instance, one-to-one supervision
like it is for a car, but this is where that, that training
model and more range access, is definitely
more beneficial.
All right. Fantastic. Hey, thank you for your contribution.
No, thank you very much. I appreciate your time.
Okay, very good. Right, now I think we're going to Malcolm
Lunston. Is that it? Malcolm, are you with us?
Malcolm, are you there? There you are.
Nice to see you.
Um, you've got a lengthy submission, so,
we've just got five minutes with you, so you might just highlight the key
points. Thank you.
Can you hear me?
Yes.
Okay. Something had gone haywire.
I owe a sincere apology because, somehow or other,
my worksheet got sent instead.
No, no problem at all. We've got you now, which is more important.
Okay. So I really have some philosophical
concerns that,
law-abiding citizens are not a big worry for my family, law-abiding
firearm owners, but licensed motorists
who don't have to pass a fit and proper
person test,
to,
get a license.
Now that's, another issue.
I wish to concentrate on Section sixty-nine.
Um, it concerns me that Section sixty-nine, the fit and proper person
test, gives unfettered power to the chief executive.
While most of the clause are prescriptive and justify guidelines,
the all-embracing clause sixty-nine dash three and
four are problematic.
In sixty-nine three, the chief executive may, for the
purpose of determining whether a person is fit and proper person,
seek and receive any information the chief executive considers relevant,
consider information obtained from any source.
That,
makes redundant, in my opinion, the other clauses in Section sixty-nine
and provides almost unbridled power to the CEO of the police to make
any determination he wishes on any grounds he wishes.
So in effect, the chief executive is judge and jury,
and it allows for liberal interpretation, as a result of
some license holders being intimidated.
For example, the threat of non-license renewal for having three minor
traffic speeding infringements over the last decade or more,
which are not criminal convictions, being widely floated
around.
This is but one example that demonstrates the liberty Parliament has
given to the police to interpret the rules beyond what I believe
Parliament might have intended.
The chief executive may, take into account any
information, prejudicial to the applicant.
Uh,
and the applicant can apply to the chief executive,
to have that reviewed, but I agree, cautiously
agree that the reservation of the chief executive is in effect
judge and jury.
It is my belief that the police or the firearm safety authority need to
be overseen by a fully independent watchdog
who can act with citizens in a manner and with power of the Police
Complaints Authority.At present, firearms licence holders appear
to only have recourse back to the chief executive, and I don't believe those are
satisfactory. So I'm submitting that the committee
consider the establishment of an independent
authority similar to an ombudsman, om- ombudsman, and a
service to ensure that citizens who have firearms
licenses who encounter issues with their licenses or
interpretation of the act have recourse to an independent review
in the interest of natural
justice. Section 69 (1) ,
says, "Will have recent signs, symptoms of mental or physical illness or
injury that may affect their ability to, safely possess
firearms."
I think what should be added into that clause is, "As determined by a
registered medical practitioner."
I think that's quite important that it is, is, is
established that that's the procedure.
Recently, I had a firearms office contact my wife
and asked her to confirm that I had dementia.
I do not know where this malicious allegation came from, but my
medical practitioner theory had, had no substance.
But it concerns me this will now be logged on my file for future
reference.
And finally, I'd also ask the select committee to keep a review
inquiry into the license renewing process to ensure it remains ethical
and fit for purpose. The paperwork is extraordinarily length
and complexly, and I believe forty-one pages compared with two
pages for a rifle license application.
Some of the questions letters
are asking exceeds the normal private personal privacy
that citizens should never be asked to reveal,
and is not required for any other authorization.
And Mr. Chairman, when you start asking questions
of elderly couples about their marital relationships and the
intimacy of those relationships, I think that exceeds the boundary of what
Parliament should be inquiring about.
Okay.
Thank you.
All right, very good. I've got a question from Mr. Carl Bates from Whanganui.
Thanks, Chair. So on, page
three of your submission,
there's a dot point that makes reference to, like, the road
toll, the number of, the number fluctuates year on year.
Currently sits at eleven point seven deaths per hundred thousand, road toll five
point six. Is that eleven point seven a reference to
suicide?
Mm.
No.
Um,
I have to explain again that that's not the submission I put in.
Um, what I did, as we all do, was a
draft, sheet of,
ideas, and then I transferred those ideas to the form
online. But somewhere along the line, this has got
attached to the form from my own error. But no, um...
Okay. Okay. Don't worry then.
No, that's all right.
I can't-
That's right.
Yeah. All right.
This is-
Hey, that's been very helpful, listening to you.
Um, and we appreciate the time that you spent this afternoon.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you.
Thank, thank you very much.
I appreciate it.
Cool. Right. Now, did I see Craig? Yeah. Mr.
Craig Body, are you there?
Where are you?
You are. There you are, Craig. We, need your mute taken off.
Right. Bye.
How are you, Craig? We need your mute button taken off.
That mm-
There you-- Oh, I thought you were there.
You all right?
Can't get it.
Modern technology. Not down the bottom there?
Along the bottom. There's a panel at the bottom.
Sound.
Would you struggle like this, Mr. Chair?
Yeah, I struggle too, like this.
Have we got anyone else?
We've got Dr. Kristen Ansell in the audience there.
Having a bit of trouble there.
What we might do, Mr. Body, if that's all right, just while you work all
that out,
we're gonna do another submitter, and then we'll come back to you. Shall we?
If that's all right?
Right.
Oh, there you are.
Hey.
You've come back in.
Yeah.
Good on you.
There we go.
If in doubt
Brilliant.
Do that again.
If in doubt, turn it off.
Right. We've got five minutes with you.
Yeah, cool. Thank you very much for, giving us this opportunity.
Um, I've been a firearms user for over thirty years.
I'm a life member of a hunting club in the Western Bay of
Plenty for over twenty years, and I've been focusing on the development of junior
shooters. Um, I'm a member of two clay target clubs and being a
past, committee member of one of those, actively involved in secondary school,
school clay target events. I'm a New Zealand representative in clay
targets and have drafted RSOs for clubs, and I enjoy
hunting for food and for pest eradication.
Firstly, I would like to commend the, the
addition of the storage requirements for firearms in the, in the new bill.
So, not being at your primary residence, is a great
addition if that can make it in. Um, that certainly
assists students and people in rental accommodation and people going
on their OE, et cetera, being able to leave their firearms with a suitably,
a suitable person in a suitable vicinity.
Um, also a lot of discussion around the age.
I think sixteen is appropriate for obtaining a, a firearms license.
Um, they can shoot, they can vote, they can legally have sex, they should be
able to hold a firearms license as well.
That will help develop junior shooters through into being responsible
adults.The issue that I have is the gun
registry or the arms registry. Um, so currently the
police hold the, the registry. Chief, chief executive of the arms
regulator, will be required to make...
Is the new, facility for that to happen.
Under the current system with the police holding the arms registry, there has
been a raft of, leaks and incidents
where information and, and things have been widely
distributed.
In the new proposed act,
under 351, Section 351, the
direct access of the arms register will be given to the Department of Conservation,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the New Zealand Customs Agency.
I get and I understand the, the final two, but the first one, the Department of
Conservation, creates quite a considerable amount of concern.
Uh, the reason for that is,
is to give direct access to provide administrative assistance to the Director
General of Conservation in relation to the issue under Section 38 of the
Con- Conservation Act 1987 of the permits for
hunting. I don't believe they need any further information than what we
already provide for, with the hunting permits and the hunting permit
system, which is simple and easy and accessible to
everybody. Um, and it, with the
current,
glitches, I suppose, or the, or the,
the issuing of private information through the police
network currently, I believe opening that up to other departments
is a recipe for further breaches to be made.
Um, the wording that I've got in there, that I've picked up in there
is,
around direct access in relation to the
registry means to do either or both of the following, whether
remotely or otherwise: A, search the registry, or
B, copy any information stored in the registry.
To me, that screams, the opportunity for further,
breaches of our privacy.
Wow. Yeah.
All right. Cool. Hey, can I just go back to your very first point?
Yep.
The additional storage. Um, so the act
provides for being able to store rifles,
whatever, in,
in other areas to license fire-
firearms hold- holder. We've heard, heard a lot about the rules around
pistols, which is really difficult.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but I, I thought there was also some issues
around prohibited firearms about s- off-site storage
away from your... Is that what you understand around that?
I have none. I'm not an endorsed firearms owner.
I've, I've got standard Class A firearms, so.
Okay. All right. Fine. Okay. I just thought we'd get that, your perspective.
Right. Any other questions first?
No.
Right. Hey, thank you for that, particularly around your age sixteen with what you
do with schools. That's quite interesting. Um, thanks for your contribution, Mr.
Buddy.
Thank you very much.
Cool. Now, Adam Bowers, he's not-
Um, a ten-minute break.
Yeah. We've got ten minute?
Yeah.
We've got no more, and then we're gonna come back to some live
presentations. Can't wait.
So, why don't we just take seven minutes or so?
We'll be back-
Oh, bothers.
Meant to be back at three ten. Okay?
Yeah.
Can we just do that?
Yep.
Okay.Dr.
Chris Munsell. Munsell.
Sorry? Is he-
He's online. He is online.
But that's you, isn't it?
It's Chris.
Please come to the front here. We, we like
people who turn up in person.
Yeah.
Got to be the right-
What's the book?
Oh,
it's a,
a handbook of, of reloading ammunition.
Just thought I'd have something interesting for you to look at.
All right.
And I, I'm gonna talk about that in my fourth point.
All right. Well, let's rip into you.
Okay.
You've been listening, so we've got five minutes with you.
Cool. Thanks. Okay. C- can you hear me okay there?
Yeah.
Right. Good. Um, so I'm a recently retired medical doctor.
Um, I've been working at Waikato Hospital as a specialist
in, pathology and microbiology, and so I'm
going to just talk about a couple of things that I've seen in the health system
that might be relevant. Um, and I'm also a, I've been a
hunter and target shooter f- for 50 years.
Um, and I'm a, an ins- hunts instructor for the New Zealand Deer
Stalkers. That's the NZDA.
Um, let's see. Uh, and
I also did our club's paperwork for the, clubs and
ranges, things that were done a couple of years ago, and I had
some interesting experiences there.
Um, I've got four issues that I'd like to qu-
Okay
... talk about very quickly.
Yeah.
Uh, the first one is the elephant in the room, which is the Firearms Register,
which is, certainly it's part of the act, clause 347, part of
the bill, I mean. Um, but it's been excluded from public consultation
in this, forum, but I'm looking forward to presenting on, on that
when that comes up. Um,
briefly, a database is certain to be hacked, and there are some things you can
do to make the consequences of that a lot less, which I've seen in the hospital
when our, hospital computer system was hacked.
Exactly how, but-
Yeah. Um, and what I don't see in the, bill
is, requirements. I think that it should be requirements written into the,
act for security of the data, data security, for
auditing it, and public disclosure of its effectiveness and safety.
Um,
right. And then my second point is talking about accessibility and
equity for, clubs and also for individuals
wanting to have a firearms license.
And what I saw when I was doing the paperwork for the club
was you have to have a very high degree of English language
competence,
computer literacy, being able to download extra programs to deal with the
paperwork, and,
and a, a lot of determination to see it through, and not every club
can do that. Um, so some clubs, even, some
clubs like the pistol clubs were good.
They've been doing that for decades, and they're all...
They've got their paperwork together, but some clubs with smaller member
bases, like our local air gun club, folded.And they
couldn't get it together to get it done.
Um, so w- it's bit of, sort of a, discrimination in a way,
not purposefully, but, uh-
Yeah
... the bar has been raised a lot on safety.
Everyone should quiet. Yep.
Um, and
I s- I, I saw this in England too when I was on sabbatical, and the successful
clubs there had a lot of lawyers or military people in them, and lots
who were... In New Zealand,
shooting and hunting is done across all
walks of life, and we want to keep it that way and have it accessible to people who
are perhaps not highly educated. Um,
and the, the, Whakatū Pātoa program,
where the, f- licensing and, training is
provided in Te Reo is excellent example of that.
And what I see in our deer stalkers club is that,
quite a lot of people are from other countries.
We had people from Korea, China,
a- and,
Indian subcontinent, there are quite a few come in now, and even South
Africa and North America. Um, and
often those people, don't have the same...
Uh, I think we, we need to make the,
firearms ownership accessible to people who perhaps don't have a strong affiliation
with the English language or with the, English culture
either. Um, we need to make that more inclusive.
Um, the third point is,
something I'm, I think is really good.
The process of bringing unregistered firearms into the, into
legal ownership. And what often happens is someone,
their friend goes overseas or dies, and, they get the
guns, and then after... and then, and that people can accumulate
a lot of other people's guns, without really meaning to.
Uh, and eventually they want to get rid of them or maybe move some of them
to their own re- own ownership and registration.
And that, and I'm, I'm very pleased to see that there's a good pathway for
that now, that's, Clause 162-
So you're happy with those arrangements?
Yes. I, I think that's good.
Right.
Clause 162 and three, Clause 331. That's great.
Um, another, a very small thing that I spotted
is, manufacturing of ammunition, which is reloading.
Um, and, and that's in, Clause, 268.
And, and it's,
I, I think that j- that just needs to be reviewed, and it's been a little bit
hasty. It's, it looks as if, you can
only possess reloading components and
equipment and a book like that if you've got a firearms license.
If I didn't have a firearms license, I wouldn't be able to have possession of that
book if I, especially if I had intention of, reloading
ammunition. Um, and one,
one section of that is that, a person shouldn't
have access to the equipment, which is things like presses and,
and calipers and, dies. Um,
and they don't even have to have intention.
Someone's accidentally missed out the intention to reload.
So if my wife walks into the, garage and I've got, reloading
equipment there, and she's got access to it, that makes her a criminal.
So if someone could just recheck the wording of that, Clause
268 and decide whether you really want to have it.
Um,
also that-
Good feedback
... people selling, reloading equipment,
people selling books like this, will they have to
ascertain that a person's got a firearms license before they can post that book to
me? Um,
so that's the four things I just wanted to bring up.
And if you've got any questions, anything else I can talk about?
No, that's good. Well, you heard about,
diagrams and
sort of related to the books. You know, a lot of people have access to diagrams
around,
guns and things like that,
that they might be looking at manufacturing a part for, but they'd also be
kept under those same rules, I presume, under this,
268. Is that right?
Um, I think there are several clauses together that include, things like
3D-printed firearms and manufacturing a, well, now, making one yourself
from scratch out of metal, and this, clause on the reloading
equipment and, seems to have been popped in there.
Right.
All right. That's very useful. Um, we haven't heard that before,
so very helpful for that. Um, thank you for your contribution
today. Thanks.
Thank you very much.
Yeah.
Thank, thanks for the opportunity to come in person and-
Right. Now, we're gonna go to Mr.
Reuben Shenky, who I see is there. How are you going?
Oh, great. Can you hear me?
Yeah, we can.
Okay. Cool. Great. Okay. Um,
so I'm a endorsement holder, a competitive shooter, and a club member,
and I support the rewrite. And I'll skip, all of the areas
other than one. So obviously I, support the independent
regulator and simple and easy to understand compliance.
And the point that I wanted to talk about was the endorsed sport
shooting. Um, so endorsement firearms
owners are, one of the safest group of firearms users,
and their competition tools should not be limited from the
international requirements. That's what I think.
Um, they should be allowed those for competition,
and even if they don't travel internationally.
It's so the rules and the methods and all the timing and,
all the details,
kind of line up with what everyone around the world is doing,
so that is kind of a, a fair standard.
And
the other part is, so allowing them to have access to these tools
doesn't compromise, um-Any, say,
risks or, or safety because they're already proven with, more
difficult to use tools than semi-automatic rifles.
Um, they are very vetted, as we've covered before.
Um,
and
as part of the B endorsement requ- requires a club
membership, ongoing participation, strict storage requirements, et
cetera.
And the clubs themselves are set up for kind of looking out for
any, issues and reporting people.
They, once they've,
like, been told not to come back to a, a club, then basically they lose their,
amount of competitions they've participated in, which will end in
losing their endorsement. Um,
and the competitions have operated for decades with a
extremely strong public safety record.
Um, I'm not sure if any evidence of criminal misuse,
injury or death or anything from those,
competitive shooter.
And the, I guess, the,
the detail is how would you make this, um...
how could you, I guess, expand the tools available?
And, there's two methods, by either the E
Cat endorsement, bringing that back, as it was
removed fairly quickly without any evidence that it would increase
safety.
Or method two is under the B Cat rules, there's
wording for minimum and maximum length of gun and the
ammo restrictions. And so removing those
two restrictions would mean that that same
framework, which has been proven,
very good, would allow the full range of
tools that they need, and still have all the
safety requirements that are there and the, the,
the club's safety, et cetera.
And
yeah, that was really the, the point that I wanted to talk about there.
Cool.
That's good.
Right.
Any, any question, members? Any other one?
No, I think we're there. We're, um...
and I don't think you should take that as a view that we didn't find your
submission interesting. We did read it.
Um,
but, as you know, we're at the end of a long process, and we've a number of
these points have been picked up, so it's very helpful.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you very much for helping today.
Thanks.
Good. Right. Now, we've got,
Sienna Dipmer,
which I don't know whether it's a relation,
um-
Brother
... but maybe, maybe not. Hello. How are you, Sienna?
Um, good.
Oh, you are related. That's you. That, that-
Uh-huh
... is that your dad who takes you hunting?
Yeah.
Yes. Nice, nice that you can join us.
Have you come back from school?
Yes.
Good. Okay, looking forward to hearing your submission.
Thank you for this opportunity to speak
to you guys about the new law that might come
in.
So yes, I am 10 years old. I am a hunter and target
shooter. I have been using firearms with my dad for
years now.
Um,
and I support the submissions of the NZDA
'cause I am a member of them.
And
I just want to support,
well, I do support that people without a license should be
able to use a firearm under the control of someone who has a
license.
I, well, I really, really, really don't want
to see,
kids
being banned from using firearms
because it teaches
to use responsibility and safety.
I would also like to invite the...
Sorry.
This is a bit hard.
I would like to invite this committee to come to this,
to the range,
what's it called?
Mm-hmm.
Kaitoke, with us to see how it all
works.
And if you have the time,
please do come.
Hey, thank you very much. And I imagine you're very smart
at school. My only question, are you safe when you're on the
firearms, when you're firing?
Yes. Very.
Now I imagine you are too. Your father looks, said he,
works alongside you, very close to you to make sure you are and you
learn all the proper things. Is that right?
Mm-hmm. Yes.
Good. Now, I've got a question from a good member from down the South
Island, Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Hi, Sienna. Thank you for your submission, and thank you for the invitation.
I'm not sure we'll get to visit, but we would.
It's not because we wouldn't like to, we're just quite busy.
Um, what, what is it that you most like about, shooting and
going to the range?
That it has lots of opportunities for us hunters
to practice before we go out hunting and to have
fun with our friends.
Right.
And to make new friends.
Thank you.
At, at your Kaitoke range, which is not in Whanganui, I understand,
is that in Wellington-
Yes
... or nearby? Is that, do, are there many other younger people
like you at, who are shooting, or are you the only one?
Are you the special person?
Um, there is quite a couple other people
that go, usually with their parents.
Right.
I've seen, like, little kids there about, like, five years old
with their parents, and they were, like, just
shooting with the little guns. And we usually have, well, we do have
these times where families, th- they can come and
fi- I mean, not, no, no. Why am
I-Like, use the firearms
that are not the strong calibers, just, like, little ones so the
little kids can handle them and to not get such a fright, like, when
they shoot them.
Oh, cool.
They have little family times then-
Mm-hmm
... and do, like, sausage sizzles and bake the-
Got it
... like, burgers.
All right. Hey, now we've got the last question.
He's from near Kaitoke and Whanganui, but
thanks to Cal Bates.
Thanks, Chair. Senator, do you think you could get your committee to arrange it
for, the end of a parliamentary week on a Thursday night?
And then I'm sure we'll, we'll arrange for, a couple of us to
come out, and you can show us how it's done.
Yes, of course.
All right. Hey, thank you very much for your contribution. That's really good.
Thank you.
Thank you, and thanks to Dad as well. All right.
Now, we're going to the last submitter, Mr. Nick Newman.
He's not-
Who has not turned up, unfortunately.
So-- And we've got...
He will be here.
He will be here in a couple of minutes?
He said that, but wait and understand.
All right. Well, we just-
Oh, he's here.
Here we are.
Oh.
Just in time. It's like ordering something apart for your gun, for your
rifle.
Here we are, Mr. Nick Newman.
Wave through.
There.
Nick, if you, if you can hear us, happy d- for you to join.
Hello.
Hey, how are you? We can hear you, but we can't see you.
But,
the main thing is we can hear you.
Better keep my face off the internet. Thanks.
Mm-hmm.
Um-
Are you that famous?
I just... No, I don't wanna be that famous.
Oh, right.
Thank you.
Okay.
Yeah.
Cool. Okay. No, no problem.
I-
Hey, now, we've got five minutes with you, so,
rip into it.
Well, you've got my submission there.
Yeah.
Um,
well, don't know if you've had a chance to read it or not.
There's a few points that I sort of wanted to raise in there as well, was, like,
as a dealer, around the dealer activities, and
multiple endorsements, and whether or not there's actually a way that this can be
simplified because prior to 2019 a dealer would
be issued a license which was kind of all inclusive and that seems to have been
broken up now into, different endorsements and the different
activities within those endorsements and whether or not there's actually a way that
that can actually be simplified.
The, other concerns were around the
historic cutoffs and permitted supply, and just wondering whether or
not the,
the permitted supply carve-outs, how that would actually...
W- what happens at that point when
the people who no longer are actually in that business, how is it
that,
the requirement for defense or police with permitted supply are actually
able to then get the products that they need if it's a legislation that
nobody else can actually enter that?
So whether or not there's a way to introduce a pathway for new entrants.
Then also around the,
endorsements for magazines.
It, the way that it reads to me is that position, there's gonna be
a separate endorsement for large capacity pistol magazines
that won't require serialization,
but you will need to have a pistol endorsement to, in order to possess those
magazines. Why can't the same logic be applied to restricted magazines?
I did some research, and as far as I can see, New
Zealand is the,
the only country in the world that actually requires
people who hold a, an endorsement for a magazine to
actually register and serialize each
individual restricted magazine.
Um,
the other one as well here, the notif- the time frames for notification, Section
33. The seven-day repair window, if you're gunsmithing,
a- as a dealer you can take temporary possession, is,
certainly a huge improvement of where it was, but whether or not that could be
extended, because if you take into account if you're getting something shipped from
Invercargill to Auckland, you have one to two days at least, you know, you're
usually around two days to get it to Auckland.
You're then gonna have two days to ship it back, and then you've got essentially
one business day left. So whether or not that could actually be extended to
30 days, um-
Is that what you-
Could be more-
30 days, 30 working days, 30 days, is that...?
Thir- thir- 30 days,
20 business days, either way-
Yeah. Right
... that would actually give you a realistic timeframe to actually conduct-
Yeah
... repairs.
Okay.
Se- seven days, of which five of those are business, um-
Yeah
... to me is just too short. It, it's, it-- Don't get me wrong, it's a big
improvement, but realistically in practice it's too short.
Okay.
Um, the compensation, provides the chief
executive may determine compensation for an arms item.
The method for calculating market value is not specified, which could lead to
inconsistent outcomes or undervalued of legally owned firearms.
Um,
without transportation guidelines, decision may appear arbitrary, undermining
confidence in the regulatory framework.
Um, just got here regulatory oversight, appeals, and accountability.
Um, personally as a dealer, you know, I've had issues
getting permits to import before, and it's kind of a case
of, "Well, we reject this because it do- doesn't constitute a
special reason, and if you don't like it, take us to court." Well, that's
significant expense to do that, and there's nothing really
that hasn't been described as, or what part of legislation
or regulation does that not abide by?
And the fact that a, a special reason could be
so ambiguous, it could be really hard to determine that.
So whether or not you could actually extend the regulatory oversight
appeals to also some of those other decisions that get made by the
regulator.
And I think also what the licensing
community really wants to see is some accountability from the regulator as
well, because there's three examples there listed.
Partic- the one that was of, of real concern was the stolen archive license
documents that went missing from an Auckland police station.
I had customers who were caught up in that, and from what they told me,
they were notified,
"Your data's been... You know, we've, we've found your information at some
criminal's address.
Sorry about that."
That's the end of it.
No, I don't-- To this day, I don't think anybody was actually held accountable for
that.
Yeah.
So the people that we put our trust in to keep ourselves safe
are not, being accountable for their own actions of
keeping the actual data safe.
Yeah.
All right. Hey, thank you for that.
Um,
I think, yeah, the dealer licensing covering all
categories of magazines are, that's very useful to know.
We've heard about the 30-day request. Members, any other questions?
No.
That's very helpful. Good. Hey, thanks, Nick, for joining us.
Have you-- Has he gone? Have you gone, Nick?
I'm s-
I'm still here.
Oh, sorry, we can't see.
He was
Sorry, we can't see you. Um, hey, but thank you for joining us this afternoon.
No problem. Thank you.
All right. Cheers for that.
Okay. Cheers.
Yeah.
Bye-bye.
We're all now going into private session.
Yes.
So I'm gonna have to ask our good man at the back there, I hope you've
enjoyed watching the spectacle.
Oh, I... Which topic?